[[faroese-sigurd-ballads-and-rimes]]
# The Ballad of Regin

Burden (refrain): Grane bore the golden hoard, Wroth did Sigurd swing his sword, There he slew the Dragon grim, Wroth did Sigurd swing his sword. 
1. Now shall ye lithe & listen well Unto this song I sing Of warfare, & of warriors, & many a mighty king. 2. Sigmund now name I, Of Volsung the son; & 'twas the youthful Hjørdis That for his wife he won. 3. Drank they right gaily Glad yule-tide in; Mighty their men-at-arms Tribute to win. 4. Swiftly came sorrow To their high hall, For many a foe was fain to see That mighty monarch's fall. 5. One & all, the warriors Weapon took in hand; Wagèd was the warfare In King Giur's land. 6. Wagèd was the warfare In King Giur's land; There did they join battle All on the South sea-strand.  7. Many fared forth to battle, But none returned again; Queen Hjørdis sat a-waiting In sorrow & in pain. 8. Forth fared Queen Hjørdis In mantle of grey, To seek for King Sigmund, On battle-field lay. 9. ‘ Lie soft, thou Sigmund, Dearest to me! All in this hour of sorrow I come to seek for thee. 10. ‘ Dearest of mine In woe as in weal, Is no green herb a-growing Avails thy hurt to heal? 11. ‘ Wide mayst thou wander Ere leeches be found, With store of salves availing To heal my deadly wound. 12. ‘ Hunding's sons in battle Wrought my downfall; Venom was on the sword-points They pierced me withal. 13. ‘ Or ever that venom Brought me my bane, My goodly brand was broken Asunder in twain.  14. ‘ Or ever my second wound Touched me with smart, The venom was seeping Thro' to my heart. 15. ‘ The fragments of my goodly sword To weapon-smith shalt bear, & bid him forge a weapon that our young son may wear. 16. ‘ For that thou bear'st within thee Shall prove a gallant boy; Sigurd shalt thou name him, & foster him with joy. 17. ‘ Lithe now & listen, For scant is my breath, Sigurd our son Shall avenge me my death. 18. ‘ The smith by the river His dwelling hath made; Bid him re-fashion Sigmund's bright blade. 19. ‘ Fávnir hight the Fire-drake Of Glitter Heath is Lord; Regin is a cunning smith, Yet none can trust his word. 20. ‘ No longer, my Hjørdis, Talk I with thee! Methinks 'tis now my dying hour That cometh fast on me. ’  21. Weeping went Hjørdis From the place where he lay, The ladies of her household Led her away. 22. The ladies of her household Succoured her eftsoon, Whenas she lay witless In sweven & swoon. 23. Woe walketh still on Middle Earth, & seeketh every wight! The King must dree his death-pangs All on the self-same night. 24. Little spared Queen Hjørdis Of honour to the dead; She bade them shape for Sigmund A bier of the gold so red. 25. Under the howe their henchmen Heaped all upon the wold, 'Twas there they laid his bright bodye Down in the darksome mould. 26. Up spake in sorrow The swains that stood by: ‘ Doleful it is on sunbright day In darksome mould to lie! 27. Alone in lady's bower Sat Hjørdis sorrowing; The first that came to woo her Was Hjálprek the King.  28. King Sigmund in warfare Laid down his life; Hjálprek the King Took Hjødis to wife. 29. She went with child, that lady fair, Till nine long months were run, & at the hour appointed She bore a beauteous son. 30. She wrapped him well in swaddling-bands When to this earth he came, A gallant boy, & fair to see, & Sigurd was his name. 31. Right well was he fostered By Hjálprek the King, The sword could he wield, The glaive could he fling. 32. Both swift & strong, nor slow of growth No feats he left untried; A heavier blow could he lay on Than any swain beside. 33. When he went forth to weapon-field, A blood-red shield he bare, & all that hue would favour Who chose a champion there. 34. Now so it chanced, in weapon-field When Sigurd went to play, That strife fell out among the swains, & wroth with him were they.  35. All from an ancient oaken-tree A mighty branch he tore, & lammed those lads so lustily That some rose up no more. 36. Then did those swains to Sigurd Speak up in dule & ire: ‘ Rather than maul thy comrades, 'Twere best avenge thy sire! ’ 37. Now when they named his father's death, His brow grew mirk as mould; He cast his blood-red shield adown All on the darksome wold. 38. He cast down sword & harness As from the field he sped, & entered in his mother's bower, With cheeks now white, now red. 39. ‘ Now lithe & listen, my mother dear, & look thou tell me plain, By what name do men name him That was my father's bane? ’ 40. ‘ Now sooth, son of Sigmund, I speak thee so plain; It was the sons of Hunding That brought thy father's bane. 41. ‘ They that slew thy father Sprang from Hunding's stem: But never while thou livest Wilt thou conquer them! ’  42. 'Twas Sigurd up & answered, & spake as best he might: ’Oft, oft in mouth of wolf-cub Wax teeth that well can bit. ’ 43. 'Twas Hjørdis hied her to the kist With red, red gold laid o'er: ‘ Behold the warrior's harness Which last thy father wore! ’ 44. The lock thereof she's loosened All with a golden key, & she's cast the blood-stained byrnie Adown before his knee. 45. Then she has ta'en the fragment twain Of Sigmund's sword of pride: These did thy father give me All on the day he died! 46. ‘ Regin the weapon-smith Dwells by the ford; From these shall he fashion As goodly as sword. 47. ‘ The shards shalt thou bear him Of Sigmund's bright brand; As goodly a blade Shall he forge to thine hand. 48. ‘ Fávnir hight the Fire-dreake Of Glitter Heath is lord; Regin is a cunning smith, Yet lean not on his word!  49. ‘ Go, cast a stone in the streamlet By pasture-field doth glide, & choose for thy need the steadfast steed That starteth not aside. ’ 50. Forth to the stream fared Sigurd, & cast therein a stone, & the steadfast steed that started not, He took him for his own. 51. None was his like in all the land, That courser good at need, & the name he bore in days of yore Was Grane, Sigurd's steed. · · · 52. Now Sigurd leapt on Grane's back When yet the ways were blind, & rode adown the river-bank Regin the smith to find. 53. It was the gallant Sigurd Rode down by lea & land, & Regin ceased his smithying & took a sword in hand. 54. ‘ Now harken, doughty Sigurd, A warrior bold enow, Whence art thou come thus early, & whither ridest thou?" 55. ‘ To thee, to thee the errand Whereon I ride abroad! I bid thee, Regin weapon-smith, To forge a goodly sword. ’  56. ‘ Now welcome, welcome, Sigurd, So true my love for thee! Shalt enter in my dwelling, & bide this night with me. ’ 57. ‘ Now nay, now nay, thou weapon-smith, I may not her abide, Lest Hjálprek the King should lack me From the high-seat by his side. 58. ‘ Now forge me a sword-blade So sharp & so bright, That stone & cold iron Asunder 'twill bite! 59. ‘ Now forge me a sword-blade, Of temper & tone That will server asunder Cold iron & stone! ’ 60. In furnace a-flaming The fragments he laid, All thro' three night-times He fashioned the blade. 61. Three night-times he laboured To fashion the sword, Till once again young Sigurd Came riding to the ford. 62. 'Twas Sigurd leapt on Grane's back, & rode along the stand, & Regin ceased his smithying & took the sword in hand.  63. ‘ Behold, I have fashioned A weapon so wight! If thou spare not thy strokes Shalt be foremost in fight. 64. ‘ Behold, I have forged thee A weapon so true! Both steel & cold iron Asunder 'twill hew. ’ 65. Now Sigurd sought the anvil, & smote thereon amain; But the new brand was broken Asunder in twain. 66. ‘ Worthy art thou, weapon-smith, To die by my hand, For that thou wouldst betray me In forging the brand! ’ 67. Adown he flung the fragments To fall at Regin's knee; Wan grew the weapon-smith As lily-flower to see. 68. The he has ta'en the fragments twain, & thrust in Regin's hand; & the arm of Regin trembled Like any lily-wand. 69. ‘ Now forge again a sword for me By might of runic rhyme & be thou ware, thou weapon-smith, I spare not a second time!  70. ‘ A sword shalt thou forge me So sharp & so leal, That 'twill sever asunder Both iron & steel! ’ 71. ‘ Yea, I will forge a second sword, But this I'll have of thee, The heart o' the Worm on Glitter Heath All for my forging-fee. 72. ‘ Now swear me this, thou Sigurd, & look thou hold it true; The heart o' the Worm on Glitter Heath To give me as my due! ’ 73. Once more in the furnace The fragments he laid; All thro' three night-times He fashioned the blade; 74. All thro' three night-times ‘ Mid roaring & reek, Till Sigurd rode thither His weapon to seek. 75. 'Twas Sigurd sprang on Grane's back When scarce the night was o'er, & rode adown the river-bank, & stayed at Regin's door. 76. It was the doughty Sigurd That halted by the ford; & Regin ceased his smithying, & took in hand the sword.  77. ‘ A sword have I forged thee Of wonder & worth! Never so wight a weapon Was seen on Middle Earth. ’ 78. Now Sigurd smote the anvil That straight did rock & reel, But never a dint could mar the glint Of Regin's tempered steel. 79. Again he smote the anvil With such a mighty blow, The iron was cloven asunder, & the earth-fast stone below. 80. Bright & clear the river Welled upwards from the spring; & Gramm they name the sword of fame Of Regin's smithying. 81. ‘ Go hence, go hence, thou Sigurd, & woo thee a high-born wife! For such a mighty warrior Would I lay down my life. ’ 82. Now lithe & listen, weapon-smith, Thy words are fair & fine, But a darker thought is hidden Deep in that heart o' thine! ’ 83. ‘ Now Sigurd, doughty Sigurd, This promise make to me; When thou dost ride to Glitter Heath, Thy comrade I may be! ’  84. ‘ First with the sons of Hunding I'll meet on foughten field; Then will I hie to Glitter Heath This biting brand to wield. 85. ‘ Yea, first to fight with Hunding 's sons On battle-field I fare, & then I ride to Glitter Heath To raid the Dragon's lair! ’ 86. It was not Sigurd Sigmundarson Made not that vow in vain; With his own hand he slew the band That brought his father bane. 87. Both one & all, he saw them fall That did his sire to death, Or ever he turned him homeward, & hied him to Glitter Heath. 88. It was Sigurd Sigmundarson Rode down by greenwood shaw; And, sitting apart in secret, An agèd man he saw. 89. A silken cap was on his head, As down the glade he came, & in his hand a Finnish bow, & no man knew his name. 90. With buckled leggings, countrywise, That ancient man drew near; One burning eye was in his head, & at his back a spear.  91. ‘ And art thou Sigurd Sigmundarson, A warrior bold, I trow, Say, whence hast thou come to greenwood glade, & whither ridest now?" 92. ‘ Of late I fared to battle-field, & Hunding's sons I slew; But now I ride to Glitter Heath A daring deed to do. ’ 93. ‘ Now harken, Sigurd Sigmundarson, & look thou tell to me, What name is his, the caitiff carle, That followeth after thee? ’ 94. ‘ Regin the smith men name him; A cunning smith is he, & brother in blood to the loathly Worm, & therefore he followeth me!" 95. ‘ Now wherefore hath he bidden thee To delve these ditches twain? The man that bid thee delve them, That man desired they bane. ’ 96. ‘ 'Twas Regin bid me grave them, These grofts, by one, by two, For that in this adventure He is my comrade true. ’ 97. ‘ Did Regin bid thee grave them With never a third thereby, Then Regin is a traitor foul That fain would see thee die.  98. ‘ Grave thou yet another, A little space below, To catch the Dragon's deadly spume That from his mouth will flow. 99. ‘ A fourth shalt thou fashion, Yet closer at hand; ‘ Then shalt thou, Sigurd, Therein take thy stand. ’ 100. The Worm slid forth from the red, red gold All at the eventide, & Sigurd sprang on Grane's back, & swiftly did he ride. 101. Little deeming of danger, The Dragon crept abroad; & Sigurd sprang from saddle, & drew his trusty sword. 102. The Worm slid forth from the Treasure, Adown the dyke to creep, His belly clave to the lower earth Full thirty fathom deep, 103. But ever the back of the monster Was high in the air aboon; & Sigurd seized his biting brand, & drew, & stuck eftsoon. 104. So stern was the sword-stroke, So mighty the blow, That all the girth of Middle Earth Was shaken to & fro.  105. Shook every leaf on every tree & earth the tree-roots under, When Sigurd drew his trusty sword, & clave the Worm asunder. 106. Up & spake the loathly Worm, All broken where he lay: ‘ Who is the doughty warrior Dares deal such blows to-day? ’ 107. ‘ Sigurd shalt thou name me, Of Sigmund the son; Hjørdis she that bore me After his days were done. ’ 108. ‘ Lithe & listen, Sigurd, To this I ask of thee; What man was in thy following The livelong way to me? ’ 109. ‘ With Regin thy brother I came to the Heath, Foulest of traitors, Desiring thy death. ’ 110. Up & spake the fierce Fire-drake, A-floating in his gore: ‘ Regin the false weapon-smith Must tread the earth no more. 111. ‘ Of traitors worst is Regin, Who fain thy bane would be; Then deal thou with the weapon-smith As thou hast dealt by me! ’  112. Up spake the wily weapon-smith: ‘ Where is that fee of mine, The Dragon's heart that is my part, As thou dist swear langsyne? ’ 113. Oh, out he hewed the Dragon's heart, Was three ells' length & more, & he brandered it all on burning wood Because of the oath he swore. 114. His hand, sore scorched with burning heat, All on his lips he laid, & the speech he knew of the birds that flew, & the beasts in the greenwood glade. 115. Up & spake the little bird That sat on oaken-tree: ‘ Eat of the heart, thou Sigurd, And thou wouldst wiser be! ’ 116. The heart doth he take from the wooden stake, And all to eat is boun, While Regin of the poisoned gore To drink hath laid him down. 117. Regin hath laid him down to drink Of the Dragon's poisoned blood, & Sigurd dealt him his death-wound, Nor stirred from where he stood.  118. It was the doughty Sigurd That swung his sword amain; Regin the smith he sundered Apart in pieces twain. 119. Such treasure won Sigurd As ne'er can be told, When as he slew the loathly Worm That lay upon the wold. 120. All in the red of morning When dew bedecked the ground, Twelve kists well-filled with the red, red gold On Grane's back he bound, 121. Twelve kists well-filled with treasure, & mounted there beside, & swift the good steed Grane Thro' holt & heathland hied. 122. Swift, swift they haste by wood & waste, The homeward way unknown, & they must lie the livelong night With the cold rain dripping down. 123. Oh lightly trode Grane On stone as in stall! Never a steed so steadfast Was known in kingly hall. 124. Now will I cease from song awhile, & see that ye mind it well, Ere once again I raise my strain This three-fold tale to tell.
Grane bore the golden hoard, Wroth did Sigurd swing his sword, There he slew the Dragon grim, Wroth did Sigurd swing his sword.



Among the surprising features of this ballad, aside from its length, is how closely it parallels the story as we have it in the Volsunga Saga.  The sources seem so clearly from the North that it is surprising to find close parallels to the Nibelungenlied in the third of these poems, such close parallels, that the author must have been familiar with that work, or at the least from a source for or a derivative from it.  It is no use suggesting that the poems may be by different authors and from different times, for the three ballads of Regin, Brynhild, and Hogni are clearly a single work, one picking up where the previous one leaves off.  This poem is comparable in length to the equivalent section of the Saga, and in places is more detailed.  Sigmund's death scene is much longer here.  His instructions about his son, and his prophetic words on what his son will do are parallel to scenes in other ballads, and so may be merely a part of the ballad tradition than of any older source of the story.  Even the scene in the saga in which Odin arrives to provide advice on digging pits appears in this version which is otherwise seldom overtly pagan.  In some of the southern versions of the story we may wonder how well informed the author actually is on heathen matters, but the stranger here is clearly Odin.  He is described as wearing a silk hat; silk is not commonly associated with Odin, but Odin does wear a hat, and hats are a standard feature of death and underworld gods.  He also carries a spear and is one eyed.  None of these three details is necessary to the action, so they exist apparently for the sake of identifying the stranger.  The advice on hole digging is also more elaborate here than in the saga; unfortunately, however, it is no more coherent here than it is there.  This work differs from the saga and the eddaic poems in a number of small details of fact or motivation, but the similarities are far more striking than than the differences.  The poem that follows, Mr. Smith-Dampier considers the best done of the three, and I suspect it is, though it also has the best material to work with, and it is hard not to be disappointed at the lack of mythic material.  Since the author knew who Odin was and since he had such traditional sources, he must have known of the ring and its curse, the Valkyrie and the rest.  Apparently he found it expedient not to emphasise the role of the gods in the story.

—

THIS Ballad in the main follows Volsunga Saga. It has, however, a good many points of discrepancy.
a. Regin is not the foster-father of Sigurd.
b. Sigurd is not universally popular.
c. Sigurd learns of his father's death in a manner not paralleled in V.S.
d. Sigurd chooses his steed by a device not found elsewhere.
e. There is no visit to Grípir, the uncle who spaes the hero's future, and nothing is said to the origin of the Treasure, doubtless perfectly well-known to the Faroëse public. Though its bulk has considerably increased, it does not reach the preposterous proportions described in the Nibelungen Lied, where it loads a procession of 144 baggage-waggons.
f. The Ballad departs from the primitive taboo preserved in the Lays, in making Sigurd name his name to the Dragon. Lyngby includes a verse after the smithying of the sword, which describes the slaying of two lesser dragons, but this is omitted by the best versions. The 'spring' so casually mentioned in v. 80 must be reminiscent of the second trial of the sword, which severed a tuft of wool sent drifting downstream against the sword-edge. The scene between Sigurd and his mother may be compared to that between Gudrun, and her sons in Hamðis-Mál. Such scenes were doubtless fresh in men's memories at the time when the Ballad was composed. To this day, the wife of a man killed in a Corsican vendetta will lay by his blood-stained shirt, if her children are young, till her eldest son is of an age to take up the feud, and the whole of this episode can be paralleled in many folk-stories, from Ireland to Papua and New Guinea. (1)
	The arrangement of the ditches (v. 95 et seq.) is more complicated and less intelligible than in V.S. Such stratagems, in big-game countries, are by no means obsolete. A similar tale is told of Feodor Tyrianine, the Russian folk-hero.

1. W. P. Ker, 'On the History of the Ballads 1100-1500' (Proceedings of British Academy, Vol. IV. Oxford Univ. Press, 1909). 



Sources

Translation from: Sigurd the Dragon-Slayer: A Faroëse Ballad-Cycle, E.M. Smith-Dampier, 1934. 
Original: "Regin Smiður" (Regin the Smith), Faroese ballad (124 stanzas). 
Referring to myths from the 9th century, put to rhyme probably in the 14th century, 
it was written down 1851 by V. U. Hammershaimb in the New Faroese language (in FÆRÖISKE KVÆDER).

http://www.odins-gift.com/pclass/theballadofregin-dampier.htm