# Morrígan
§ Etymology: "Phantom Queen"
§ "strongly resembles the Badbh"



Mórrígan / Morrígan [MORE-REE-gun, anglicized as MORE-rih-gun]: Her name is interpreted a bit differently depending on whether the first syllable has an accent (fada) or not. If it did originally have the fada, then it means ‘Great Queen,’ an interpretation I support based on the extremely wide array of attributes she has when one looks at all of the Old Irish sources, and not just a few well known episodes. If the first syllable did not have an accent, then it means ‘Nightmare / Phantom Queen,’ which does reflect one of her aspects (but not all). She is a powerful goddess associated with battle, death, magic and prophecy, as well as the earth, fertility, sexuality, and many other things. To characterize her as a ‘Dark Goddess of Battle’ is to stereotype her to almost a caricature. She is powerful and demands respect, but her aspects include almost everything from creation to destruction. She unites with the Dagda at Samhain, and with her blessing (as a Sovereignty Goddess) and her leadership and magical abilities, she helps the Tuatha De Danann vanquish another supernatural race, The Fomorians, in Cath Maige Tuired. As I have shown elsewhere (Proceedings of the Harvard Celtic Colloquium, Vol. XIX), The Morrigan is the same goddess as Anu, and as Danu. This deepens our understanding of her, and that research should by read by anyone wishing to understand the full range of her attributes. [https://discoverdruidry.wordpress.com/2018/05/28/calling-to-the-hollow-hills-irish-gods-names-and-attributes/]
