> [[saeedipour]]. Draft. "Dramatic Myths in the Avasto-Rig Vedic Pantheon: The Dramatic Myth of Mashya and Mashyana Revisited". Retrieved Oct 26 2020. [academia](https://www.academia.edu/32003021/Dramatic-Myths-in-the-Avasto-Rig-Vedic-Pantheon-The-Dramatic-Myth-of-Mashya-and-Mashyana-Revisited), [pdf](a-saeedipour-drafta.pdf)

## Abstract
The concerned texts (The Avesta and the Rig Veda) that are being dealt with here in this paper had been, presumably, composed and wrought before Homer's Written Epics of Iliad and Odysseus, certainly, before Sophocles' and Aeschylus' dramas(429/458 B.C.). And my emphasis is the substantial availability and existence of dramatic myths, cores, and narratives in the literature of these Two Ancient Texts.

Conceptually, this is a different sort of reading of the dramatic myth of Mashya and Mashyana within such two valuably remained and strange texts that have been ever written by man. As in Literature, not in History indeed, anything in the mythological world may imaginatively take place, illogically of course. Or, one may say that in mythology mostly, or always, incidents and stories are incredibly illogical, and contrary to historical events and accidents. In the Ancient Greek drama through the tragedy of 'Prometheus Bound' written by Aeschylus, the Greek semi- god: Prometheus there can purposefully steal fire from heavenly empowered gods and intentionally give it to the earthly mortal creatures, specifically Man to use it in his desperately challenging and catastrophic life. Tiresias the blind soothsayer, descended from Oudaeus, in the Sophocles' tragedy of Oedipus the King, can mercilessly predict the future fate of Thebes happening to the people there. Cerci the whore, in the Homer's Epics, may lustily bewitch the bravest and the most powerful Greek heroes. A lover may unbelievably deform himself from humanly bodied shape into a bird or beast figure.

There in the Avesto-Rig Vedic Pantheon exist such a multitude kinds of figures of myths comparatively significant and connotatively meaningful as well as hypothetical. One
[imaginatively would be a] set of potential earthly human couple: Mashya and Mashyana grows as a set of plants out of a creatively forty years of processing fetus/ being in, and under, the air, sun, soil and water. They are simply but extendedly metamorphosed and clutched together as they were men. Because there is apparently no specific limit or any fixed and determined laws or regulations in the world of myths whatsoever. Characteristically, it seems that myths naturalistically run their gradual steps and stages within their own scope signals and extent conventions. This must of course be touched from some point of view in a different way and opportunity.