Hopkinson, Beatrice, "Archaeological Evidence of Saltmoulding at important European Saltsites and its Relationship to the Distribution of Urnfielders," p. 1.
Bauschatz, Paul C., "Urth's Well," p. 53.
Greppin, John A. C., "Hittite -z (a), Armenian z-, and the Theory of Armeno-Hittite Loan Words," p. 87.
Harbison, Peter, "The Coming of the Indo-Europeans to Ireland: an Archaeological Viewpoint," p. 101.
Maringer, Johannes, "Grave and Water in Prehistoric Europe," p. 121.
Lehmann, Winfred P. & Hundirapola Ratanajoti, "Typological Syntactical Characteristics of the Shatapathabraahmana," p. 147.
Lincoln, Bruce, "Indo-Iranian *Gautra," p. 161.
Magrath, William T., "The Athenian King List and Indo-European Trifunctionality," p. 173.
Miranda, Rocky V., "Indo-European Gender: A Study in Semantic and Syntactic Change," p. 199.
Maurer, Walter H., "A Re-Examination of Rgveda X.129, The Naasadiiya Hymn," p. 217.
Simpson, John Mack, "Comparative Structural Analysis of Three Ethical Questions in Beowulf, the Nibelungenlied, and the Chanson de Roland," p. 239.
Zanotti, David G., "Another Aspect of the Indo-European Question: A Response to P. Bosch-Gimpera," p. 255.
Collins, Alfred, "Reflections on Rg-Veda X.129: Stimulated by Walter Maurer's Paper," p. 271.
Floyd, Edwin D., "Dissimilation of Nasals in Greek Πεφασμαι, etc," p. 283.
Barber, Elizabeth J. Wayland, "The PIE Notion of Cloth and Clothing," p. 294.
Golab, Zbigniew, "Veneti//Venedi - The Oldest Name of the Slavs," p. 321.
Lincoln, Bruce, "The Myth of the 'Bovine's Lament'," p. 337.
Strutynski, Udo, "Germanic Divinities in Weekday Names," p. 363.
Râdulescu, Mircea-Mihai, "The Indo-European Cognates of Daco-Romanian Strúgure, 'Grape'; 'Bunch'," p. 385.