Houben, Jeffrey L., "Word-Order Change and Subordination in Homeric Greek," p. 1.
Hoenigswald, Henry M., "Diminutives and Tatpurusas: The Indo-European Trend toward Endocentricity," p. 9.
Lehmann, Winfred P., "Indo-European and Theoretical Linguistics," p. 15.
Miller, D. Gary, "Some Theoretical and Typological Implications of an IE Root Structure Constraint," p. 31.
Hopper, Paul J., "The Typology of the Proto-Indo-European Segmental Inventory," p. 41.
Bomhard, Allan R., "The 'Indo-European-Semitic' Hypothesis Reexamined," p. 55.
Fairbanks, Gordon H., "Case Inflections in Indo-European," p. 101.
Winter, Werner, "Internal Structure & External Relationship of Two Verbal Paradigms: Tocharian B weñ-, A weñ- 'SAY'," p. 133.
Klein, Jared S., "The Indo-Iranian Prehistory of the Sanskrit asáu/amúm Pronoun," p. 161.
Caflisch, Jacob, Sr., "Typology of a Minimum Étalon-Module: 'Supine'-Like Structures in OCS, Lithuanian, and Finnish," p. 177.
Kellens, Jean, "Vibrations and Twinkling," p. 197.
Greppin, John A. C., "A Note on Dacian *barðo- (> Rom. barza 'Stork': Arm. brdor 'Lammergeyer')," p. 203.
Strutynski, Udo, "Philippson Contra Dumézil: An Answer to the Attack," p. 209.
Sihler, Andrew L., "The Etymology of PIE *reeg'- 'King' etc," p. 221.
Lincoln, Bruce, "Death and Resurrection in Indo-European Thought," p. 247.
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar, "On the Relationship between the Vigrahavyaavartanii and the Nyaayasuutra-s," p. 265.
Gimbutas, Marija, "The First Wave of Eurasian Steppe Pastoralists into Copper Age Europe," p. 277.
Mallory, James P., "The Chronology of Early Kurgan Tradition (Part Two)," p. 339.
Häusler, Alexander, "Comments on 'The Chronology of the Early Kurgan Tradition'," p. 369.
Merpert, N. Ja., "Comments on 'The Chronology of the Early Kurgan Tradition'," p. 373.