Lehmann, Winfred P., "The Structural Approach of Jakob Grimm and His Contemporaries," p. 1.
Owens, Gareth, "The Structure of the Minoan Language," p. 15.
Louden, Bruce, "Bacchylides 17: Theseus and Indo-Iranian Apâm Napât," p. 57.
Griffith, R. Drew, "Elysium Revisited," p. 79.
Boutkan, D. & M. G. Kossman, "Some Berber Parallels of European Substratum Words," p. 87.
Sen, Subhadra Kumar, "Word Ordering in the Astadhyayi," p. 101.
Zimmer, Stefan, "Comments on a great book: Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture, ed. by J.P. Mallory and D.Q. Adams," p. 105.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Book Chronicle," p. 165.
Polomé, Edgar C., "About Dumézil: Apropos of a special number of the Zeitschrift für Religionswissenschaft," p. 248.
Renfrew, Colin, "Time Depth, Convergence Theory, and Innovation in Proto-Indo-European: 'Old Europe' as a PIE Linguistic Area," p. 257.
Sarianidi, V., "Near Eastern Aryans in Central Asia," p. 295.
Estell, Michael, "Orpheus and Rbhu Revisited," p. 327.
Lynn, Chris J. & Dean Miller, "Three Carved Stone Vases from the Minoan Villa at Aghia Triada, Crete: a Trifunctional Set?" p. 335.
Collinge, N. E., "The Laws of Indo-European: The State of the Art (1998)," p. 355.
Anderson, Earl R., "Horse-Sacrifice and Kingship in the Secret History of the Mongols and Indo-European Cultures," p. 379.
Greppin, John A. C., "Gk.------: A Fragment Plant and its Eastern Origin," p. 395.
Shields, Kenneth, Jr., "On the Indo-European 'Bare Stem' Acc. Personal Pronoun," p. 409.
Vanséveren, Sylvie, "The Meaning of Hittite sakuriya- in the Annals of Hattusilis I," p. 419.
Litzén, Magnus, "VIRGILIANVM ALPHABETH: A Linear B Remincens in the Learned Tradition," p. 427.
Sergent, Bernard, "Report on the 2nd Colloqium of Anthropology and Comparative Religion of the Indo-European World," p. 431.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Book Chronicle," p. 433.
Justus, Carol F., "Book Notices," p. 525.