Woudhuizen, Fred C., "Old Phrygian: Some Texts and Relations," p. 1.
Erdal, Marcel, "Around the Turkic 'Apple'," p. 27.
Holton, Frederick S., "Literary Tradition and the Old English Bee Charm," p. 37.
Shields, Kenneth, Jr., "The Origin of the Armenian Locative Plural," p. 55.
Pulleyblank, Edwin G., "The Typology of Indo-European," p. 63.
Lehmann, Winfred P., "Comment on the Typology of Indo-European by Edwin G. Pulleyblank," p. 119.
Schmidt, Karl Horst, "Comments on Edwin G. Pulleyblank: The Typology of Indo-European," p. 123.
Pulleyblank, Edwin G., "Reply to the Comments of Professors Lehmann and Schmidt," p. 135.
Caflisch, Jacob, Sr., "Prague Phonology, Vector Typology, and Jacob Grimm," p. 143.
York, Michael, "The Mithraic Tauroctony as a Derivative of an Indo-European Soma/Haoma Sacramental Cult," p. 193.
Jovanovich, Borislav, "Silver in the Yamna (Pit-Grave) Culture in the Balkans," p. 207.
Deshpande, Madhav M., "Aryans, Non-Aryans, and Braahmanas: Processes of Indigenization," p. 215.
Melchert, H. Craig, "Historical Phonology of Anatolian," p. 237.
Bubenik, Vit, "Morphological and Syntactic Change in Late Middle Indo-Aryan," p. 259.
Lutzky, Harriet, "On a Concept Underlying Indo-European Terms for the Sacred," p. 283.
Matsumoto, Katsumi, "Problem of Ergativity in Indo-European," p. 303.
Bellquist, Julie Bonner, "'Badger' in Indo-European," p. 331.
Testen, David, "Gender Marking in Greek Compound Adjectives," p. 347.
Isaac, G. R., "Numbers in Early Welsh Poetry," p. 359.
Karalinuunas, Simas, "Reflexes of IE *h2rtko- 'bear' in Baltic," p. 367.