Gening, V. F., "The Cemetery at Sintashta and the Early Indo-Iranian Peoples," p. 1.
Musès, Charles, "Celtic Origins and the Arthurian Cycles: Geographic-Linguistic Evidence," p. 31.
Poultney, James W., "The Language of the Northern Picene Inscriptions," p. 49.
Markey, Thomas L., "Delabialization in Germanic," p. 65.
Ureland, P. S., "Prehistoric Bilingualism and Pidginization As Forces of Linguistic Change," p. 77.
Smith, R. Morton, "Unhumorous Puns in Ancient India," p. 105.
Simpson, John Mack, "Sapientia Et Fortitudo: The Drama of Athalsteinn," p. 113.
Cohen, Gerard Leonard, "Etymology of Greek Patass- (= Strike and Related Words)," p. 121.
Windekens, A. J. Van, "Once Again on Greek Initial Zeta," p. 129.
Teitler, Hans C., "Ausonius and His Mother's Brother," p. 133.
Giacomelli, Roberto, "Written and Spoken Language in Latin-Faliscan and Greek-Messapic," p. 149.
Shevoroshkin, V., "On the Hittite-Luwian Numerals," p. 177.
Shields, Kenneth, Jr., "More on the Early Indo-European Nominal Inflection: The Origin of the -r-/-n- Stems," p. 213.
Brosman, Paul W., Jr., "The Semantics of the Hittite Gender System," p. 227.
Campanile, Enrico, "Meaning and Prehistory of Old Irish Cú Glas," p. 237.
Dunkel, George, "Fighting Words: Alcman Partheneion 63 mákhontai," p. 249.
Lincoln, Bruce, "The Hellhound," p. 273.
Lacy, Alan F., "Gothic weis, airkns and the Germanic Notion of 'Holy'," p. 287.
Miller, Roy Andrew, "Japanese, Altaic, and Indo-European," p. 307.
Adams, Douglas Q., "Tocharian AB si-n- 'Be Oppressed, Afflicted' and A si-n- [B soy-] 'Be Satisfied'," p. 315.