Back in 2018, while attending the University of Houston for my BA, I  was introduced to Indo-European Studies by my classics professor, [Casey Dué Hackney](hackney.md), who had studied under [Gregory Nagy](nagy-g.md).  The idea that we could reveal an undiscovered past through the comparative method excited me so much I've been spending the past four years hoarding scholarship like a [dragon](serpent-worm-eel-snake.md) hoards gold.

As I began researching, I noticed that there was a serious divide between IE Linguists and "cultural" PIE Scholars, as well as a divide between scholars in general and the lay public: 

- Many IE Linguists are unaware of the *sheer amount* of cultural reconstruction that has been done on the Proto-Indo-Europeans. This site was created in part to show scholars the wonders their colleagues have discovered. M. L. West and Mallory are just the tip of the iceberg, *two centuries* of scholarship awaits you.

- On the other hand, members of the public often don't know where to look for solid information on the Indo-Europeans, and scholars are universally unaware that some of these lay people are apart of a growing religious movement which could be termed "[Indo-European Spirituality](content-producers.md)". This site aims to provide practioners with a guide to scholarly works, and to show scholars the impact their work has had on people's spiritual lives. For many polytheists Indo-European studies isn't just research, it's a means of dialogue between various branches of reconstructionist polytheism.  For example, the Ár nDraíocht Féin includes PIE [rituals](https://www.adf.org/grove-hearth-cultures/proto-indo-european) on their website, and the group has been described as follows: 
> Despite the Gaelic name, ADF Druidry actually encompasses all Indo-European religions, including Celtic, Germanic, Hellenic, Roman, Slavic, Gaulish, and Vedic religious practices. In that sense, ADF uses the term Druid as "a member of the Indo-European intelligentsia, especially of the clergy" or even more broadly as "a worshipper of Indo-European gods and goddesses". Strictly speaking, members of ADF are not only "druids", but are also members of related Indo-European religions which may have other terms for people in such clergy roles (e.g., gothi for clergy of ancient Norse religions). (Source: [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ár_nDra%C3%ADocht_Féin))

Everything from books, articles, presentations, talks, blog posts, comments on YouTube/hypothe.is/Facebook/Reddit, devotional websites, memes, to long forgotten works dragged out of dusty library basements will be included. Everything is separated, organized by topic, and interconnected. **When unhistorical and modern spiritual views are included, they will be treated as aspects of a  New Religious Movement and designated under a separate header.** When my own ideas appear they will show up either as refernces to one of my works or--if they are small ideas--they will be notes as "[[dodge-commentary]]".

Given the amount of material, many of the entries are rough. In time however, this will be the #1 site for cultural PIE topics. If you are interested in helping develop it please [[contribute]]. This site is written in markdown and hosted by [Obsidian Publish](https://obsidian.md). There are very few sites that combine Digital Humanities and Indo-European Studies like this one. One phenomenal exception is the website for [[bjorn2017]].

## Other
[[conventions]]
[[files-directory]]
[[explanations]]