> [[blasing]]; [[dum]]; [[lint]] (eds).
> Book, collection of articles.
> *Armenian, Hittite, and Indo-European studies : a commemoration volume for Jos J.S. Weitenberg*.
> Hebrew University Armenian studies 15.

> [doi](https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv1q26q8b)
> [jstor](https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv1q26q8b)

## Description
> Jos J.S. Weitenberg, Professor of Armenian Studies at Leiden University (1994-2009), co-founder and President of the Association Internationale des Études Arméniennes, was a scholar of global standing in Hittite, Armenian and Indo-European linguistics. The twenty-three studies by colleagues and former students gathered in this volume reflect some of the depth and breadth of Weitenberg?s scholarship: Hittite and Anatolian, to which Weitenberg made a classic contribution with 'Die hethitischen u-Stämme' (1984), and Indo-European etymologies. Armenian dialectology is well represented, as are contributions to wider Armenian culture, and the reception of Greek literary culture in Armenian. Further studies are devoted to digital preparation of critical editions, the relationship between master and pupil as well as the Armenian reception and interpretation of Biblical and apocryphal material, to which Weitenberg contributed in 'Eusèbe d'Émèse. Commentaire de la Genèse. Texte arménien de l'édition de Venise [1980]. Fragments grecs et syriaques. Avec traductions', together with Françoise Petit and Lucas Van Rompay (2011).

## Contents
> Die armenischen Pflanzennamen in Peter Simon Pallas' Flora Rossica, Eine Studie zu Etymologie und sprachlicher Interaktion / Uwe Bläsing -- Nuovi contributi allo studio dellʼantica traduzione armena della Cronaca di Eusebio / Giancarlo Bolognesi -- A minor edition of the Armenian version of Joseph and Aseneth / Christoph Burchard -- The object of Ałtʻamarcʻi's affections / S. Peter Cowe -- Critical edition : endpoint or starting point? : an experiment with Basilius / Andrea de Leeuw van Weenen -- 'Henbane' in Slavic / Rick Derksen -- Die Sprache(n) der armenischen Diaspora in Jerusalem / Jasmine Dum-Tragut -- The past imperfect in the western group of Armenian dialects / Gayane Gevorgyan -- Hittite 'water' / Alwin Kloekhorst-- Illustrations of the Armenian Alexander Romance and motifs from Christian iconography / Dickran Kouymjian -- Severian Cento No. 2 in MS Galata 54 / Henning Lehmann Traces of Indo-European 'Father Sky, God' in Armenian / Hrach Martirosyan -- Il ԲԱՌ ԳԻՐԳ ՏԱԼՒԱՆԻ Un dizionario armeno-italiano del XVII secolo / Alessandro Orengo -- A short phrase book of the Stepanakert Variant of the Karabagh dialect / Andrzej Pisowicz -- Philo, Quaestiones in Genesim 2.62 and the problem of Deutero-theology / David T. Runia -- From Mashtotsʻ to Ngaʻara : the art of writing and cultural survival in Armenia and Rapa Nui / James R. Russell -- Hittite plant names in KBo XIII 248 / Peter Schrijver -- Vitae Homeri, Pseudo-Nonnos' commentary on Sermon 4 by Gregory of Nazianzus and the Armenian Book of causes / Erna Manea Shirinian -- The Orbelian family cemetery in Ełegis, Vayocʻ Jor, Armenia / Michael E. Stone -- Traditions of Armenian biblical exegesis : the example of the book of Proverbs / Robert W. Thomson -- Lydian qeśi-, qelλk and Lycian tihe / Theo van den Hout The miniature of Ezekiel's throne vision in the Erznka Bible of 1269 (J1925) and its textual background / Theo Maarten van Lint -- Two Armenian hymns on Abraham and Sarah attributed to Ephrem the Syrian / Lucas van Rompay.