Shepel, E. A., "Populations in the Northern Donets Basin from the 3rd to 2nd Millennia B.C." p. 1.
Woodhouse, Robert, "The Origin and Relative Chronology of Winter's Law," p. 27.
Justus, Carol F., "Numeracy and the Upper German Decades," p. 45.
Burton, Philip, "Using the Gothic Bible: Notes on Jared S. Klein 'On the Independence of Gothic Syntax'," p. 81.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Beer, Runes and Magic," p. 99.
Knobloch, Von Johann, "Lat. conspiraare und seine Bedeutung in verschiedenen sozialen Sondersprachen," p. 107.
Bonfante, Giuliano, "The Etymology of híppos," p. 111.
Bonfante, Giuliano, "Homeric Text is Mycenean," p. 115.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Book Chronicle," p. 117.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Short Bibliographic Notices," p. 169.
Schwink, Frederick W., "Book Review," p. 249.
Pearson, Roger, "Comprehensive Listing of Available Monographs," p. 253.
Sick, David H., "Cattle-Theft and the Birth of Mithras: Another Look at Cumont's Vedic Parallel," p. 257.
Louden, Bruce, "Epeios, Odysseus, and the Indo-European Metaphor for Poet," p. 277.
Jackson, Peter, "The Codes of Inheritance: Some Remarks on an Indo-European Palmiset," p. 305.
Holland, Gary B., "Relativization and Word Order in Old Irish and Vedic Sanskrit," p. 323.
Râdulescu, Mircea-Mihai, "Fairies, Flowers and Magic Daco-Romanian zîna and Its Indo-European Cognates," p. 333.
Manaster Ramer, Alexis, "Armenian -k` < PIE *-(e)s," p. 361.
Bammesberger, Alfred, "On Fresh Fish in Some (Indo-)European Languages," p. 399.
Horowitz, Michael G., "The Scientific Dialectic of Ancient Greece and the Cultural Tradition of Indo-European Speakers," p. 409.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Book Chronicle," p. 421.