Jones-Bley, Karlene, "The Earliest IE Burial Tradition in Pre-Celtic Ireland," p. 1.
O'Sullivan, Muiris, "Passage Tomb Art of Western Europe," p. 15.
Herity, Michael, "The Phases of the Irish Neolithic," p. 29.
Raftery, Barry, "Horse and Cart in Iron Age Ireland," p. 49.
Brenneman, Walter, "Transformation and Symbolism in the Irish Celtic and IE Cattle Raiding Myth: A Symbolic Analysis," p. 73.
Rowlett, Ralph M., "Western 'Old European' Response to Early IE Chiefdoms," p. 93.
Ní Chatháin, Próinséas, "Traces of the Cult of the Horse in Early Irish Sources," p. 123.
Woudhuizen, Fred C., "Etruscan and Luwian," p. 133.
Alford, Garth, "'Eelíson: A Foreign Eschatological Concept in Homer's Odyssey," p. 151.
Suzuki, Seiichi, "The Germanic Verschärfung: A Syllabic Perspective," p. 163.
Anthony, David W., "The Archaeology of Indo-European Origins," p. 193.
Mallory, James P., "Kurgan and Indo-European Fauna III: Birds," p. 223.
Kosko, Alexander, "The Vistula - Oder Basins and the North Pontic Region," p. 235.
Olmsted, Garrett, "Gaulish, Celtiberian and Indo-European Verse," p. 259.
Miller, Dean A., "Two Warriors and Two Swords: The Legacy of Starkað," p. 309.
Klimov, G. A., "Some Thoughts on Indo-European-Kartvelian Relations," p. 325.
Waltz, Heidi, "Proto-Germanic Plain C-Stems: A Case Study," p. 343.
Bammesberger, Alfred, "On the Etymology of Old English fricca/ friccea," p. 349.
Yoshida, Kazuhiko, "Reconstruction of Anatolian Verbal Endings: The Third Person Plural Preterites," p. 359.