Mizuno, Tomaki, "Beowulf as a Terrible Stranger," p. 1.
Sayers, William, "Portraits of the Ruler: Óláfr Pái Hoskuldsson and Cormac Mac Airt," p. 77.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Draupadi and Her Dumézilian Interpretation," p. 99.
Kurke, Leslie, "Pouring Prayers: A Formula of IE Sacred Poetry," p. 113.
Schwink, Frederick W., "A Reexamination of the Mycenaean Medio-Passive Finite Ending," p. 127.
Olmsted, Garrett, "The Meter of the Gaulish Inscription from Larzac," p. 155.
Greppin, John A. C., "Armenian and the Theory of Etymology," p. 165.
Freeman, Philip M., "New Evidence for Pre-Greek Labiovelars," p. 171.
Rodríguez, Martín Sevilla, "Indo-European *(s)kwalo/i-s 'sheet-fish'," p. 177.
Oshiro, Terumasa, "On Hieroglyphic Luwian Sign sú or zú," p. 181.
Gimbutas, Marija, "Introductory Remarks: The Transformation of European and Anatolian Culture 4500-2500 B.C." p. 193.
Gimbutas, Marija, "Social Structure of Old Europe," p. 197.
Ferguson, Ian, "Malta: Builders of Temples, Builders of Dolmens," p. 215.
Barber, Elizabeth J. Wayland, "Archaeolinguistics and the Borrowing of Old European Technology," p. 239.
Haarmann, Harald, "Writing from Old Europe to Ancient Crete - A Case of Cultural Continuity," p. 251.
Everson, Michael, "Tenacity in Religion, Myth, and Folklore: The Neolithic Goddess of Old Europe Preserved in a Non-Indo-European Setting," p. 277.
Meid, Wolfgang, "The Indo-Europeanization of Old European Concepts," p. 297.
Paliga, Sorin, "Proto-Indo-European, Pre-Indo-European, Old European Archaeological Evidence and Linguistic Investigation," p. 309.
Best, Jan, "Comparative Indo-European Linguistics and Archaeology: Towards a Historical Integration," p. 335.
Gamkrelidze, Thomas V., "Proto-Indo-Europeans in Anatolia," p. 341.
Puhvel, Jaan, "Hittite Regal Titles: Hattic or Indo-European," p. 351.
Adrados, Francisco R., "Etruscan as an IE Anatolian (but not Hittite) Language," p. 363.