ARTICLES
Franklin, John Curtis, "Harmony in Greek and Indo-Iranian Cosmology," p. 1.
Allen, Nick J., "The Stockmen and the Disciples," p. 27.
Loughlin, Eleanor, "The Bovine Mother: Bronze age images of the cow from Crete and the Eastern Mediterranean," p. 41.
Nielsen, Katherine, "'Hver tiðendi eru at segja frå um ragnarøkr?': The Debate over Christian Influences in Norse Indo-European Tradition," p. 61.
Miller, Dean A., "Kingship: Pre-IE Patterns and IE Innovations in the Mediterranean Area," p. 79.
Huld, Martin E., "Some Thoughts on Amazons," p. 93.
Daryee, Touraj, "Sight, Semen, and the Brain: Ancient Persian Notions of Physiology in Old and Middle Iranian Texts," p. 103.
Eska, Joseph F. & Rex E. Wallace, "Thoughts on Vercelli eu," p. 129.
Hamp, Eric P., "IE 'spleen'," p. 145.
Beckwith, Miles C., "Umbrian vesticia and other Italic Sacraments," p. 205.
Blazhek, Václav, "Elamo-Arica," p. 215.
Rose, Sarah R., "Two Versions of the Sanskrit Urvashi: Myth: From dangerous to docile," p. 243.
Kazanas, Nicholas, "Indigenous Indo-Aryans and the Rigveda," p. 275.
Agrawal, D. P., "Comments on 'Indigenous Indo-Aryans and the Rigveda'," p. 335.
Bryant, Edwin, "'Somewhere in Asia', and No More," p. 341.
Huld, Martin E., "Linguistic Science, Truth, and the Indocentric Hypothesis," p. 353.
Kuz'mina, E. E., "Comments on Kazanas' 'Indigenous Indo-Aryans and the Rigveda'," p. 365.
Mallory, James P., "Indigenous Indo-Aryans: the Preservation and Total Distribution Principles," p. 375.
Meadow, Richard H., "A Note on the Horse in Pre- and Proto-historic South Asia: A Comment on Kazanas," p. 389.
Parpola, Asko, "Comments on 'Indigenous Indo-Aryans and the Rigveda'," p. 395.
Zimmer, Stefan, "The Easy Way to Truth: 'Heaven Does Not Lie'," p. 401.
REVIEWS: Archaeology
Day, John V., Indo-European Origins: The Anthropological Evidence (2001). Reviewed by Zimmer, Stefan, p. 151.
REVIEWS: Linguistics
Wodko, Dagmar S., ed., A Lexicon of the Old Irish Glosses in the Würzburg Manuscript of the Epistles of St. Paul (2001). Reviewed by Zimmer, Stefan, p. 160.
von See, Klaus, Beatrice La Farge, Eve Picard, Katja Schulz, with the assistance of Debora Dusse, Ilona Priebe, & Betty Wahl, Kommentar zu den Liedern der Edda. Götterlieder, Vol. 3 (2000). Reviewed by Liberman, Anatoly, p. 165.
Iordanidi, S. I. & V. B. Krys'ko, Istoricheskaja grammatika drevnerusskogo jazyka (2000). Reviewed by Schmalstieg, William R., p. 167.
Hoffner, Harry A., Jr., The Hittite Laws: A Critical Edition (1997). Reviewed by Justus, Carol F., p. 179.
Baldi, Philip, The Foundations of Latin (1999). Reviewed by Drinka, Bridget, p. 188.
REVIEWS: Mythology
McCone, Kim, Pagan Past and Christian Present in Early Irish Literature (2000). Reviewed by Meier, Berhard, p. 195.
Dubuisson, Daniel, L'Occident et la religion: mythes, science et idéologie (1998). Reviewed by Sayers, William, p. 199.
REVIEWS: Archaeology
James, Simon, The Atlantic Celts: Ancient People of Modern Invention? (1999). Reviewed by Hanks, Brian K., p. 411.
Wells, Peter S., Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians: Archaeology and Identity in Iron Age Europe (2001). Reviewed by Hanks, Brian K., p. 415.
Harding, A. F., European Societies in the Bronze Age (2000). Reviewed by Jones-Bley, Karlene, p. 419.
Day, John V., Indo-European Origins: The Anthropological Evidence (2001). Reviewed by Littleton, C. Scott, p. 429.
Binghua, Wang, ed., The Ancient Corpses of Xinjiang: The Peoples of Ancient Xinjiang and their Culture (2002). Reviewed by Mallory, James P., p. 433.
Sarianidi, Victor, Nekropol' Gonura i iranskoe jazychestvo / Necropolis of Gonur and Iranian Paganism (2001). Reviewed by Mallory, James P., p. 436.
REVIEWS: Linguistics
Drews, Robert, ed., Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite Language Family (2001). Reviewed by Justus, Carol F., p. 443.
Niederreiter, Stefan, Morphologische Varianz und semantische Konkurrenz. Verbalabstrakta im Rig-Veda (2001). Reviewed by Dahl, Eystein, p. 459.
Zholobov, O. F. & V. B. Krys'ko, Istoricheskaja grammatika drevnerusskogo jazyka (2001). Reviewed by Schmalstieg, William R., p. 464.
Dolgopolsky, Aharon, The Nostratic Macrofamily and Linguistic Paleontology (1998). Reviewed by Vajda, Edward J., p. 476.
Renfrew, Colin & Daniel Nettle, eds., Nostratic: Examining a Linguistic Macrofamily (1999). Reviewed by Vajda, Edward J., p. 477.
Renfrew, Colin, ed., America Past, America Present: Genes nd Languages in the Americas and Beyond (2000). Reviewed by Vajda, Edward J., p. 481.
Olmsted, Garrett S., A Definitive Reconstructed Text of the Coligny Calendar (2001). Reviewed by Sterckx, Claude, p. 482.
REVIEWS: Mythology
Petrosyan, Armen Y., The Indo-European and Ancient Near Eastern Sources of the Armenian Epic (2002). Reviewed by Harutyunyan, Sargis B., p. 484.
Kripal, Jeffrey J., Roads of Excess, Palaces of Wisdom, Eroticism and Reflexivity in the Study of Mysticism (2001). Reviewed by Dubuisson, Daniel, p. 489.
Stoczkowski, Wiktor, Explaining Human Origins (2002). Reviewed by Dubuisson, Daniel, p. 491.
Blaive, Frédéric, Justum Bellum. Mythologie indo-européenne et Droit public romaine (1998). Reviewed by Miller, Dean, p. 494.