Manczak, Witold, "On the Ausgliederung of Germanic Languages," p. 1.
Rumsey, Alan, "Was Proto-Indo-European an Ergative Language?" p. 19.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Introductory Note to the Papers of the Tokyo 1982 Workshop on Indo-European Linguistics," p. 39.
Schlerath, Bernfried, "On the Reality and Status of a Reconstructed Language," p. 41.
Gamkrelidze, Thomas V., "The Indo-European Glottalic Theory: A New Paradigm in IE Comparative Linguistics," p. 47.
Rosén, Hannah B., "Some More Noteworthy Features of 'Primitive' Indo-European Syntax," p. 61.
Bonfante, Giuliano, "The Relative Position of the Indo-European Languages," p. 77.
Schmitt-Brandt, Robert, "Aspektkategorien im PIE?" p. 81.
Markey, Thomas L., "The Semiotics of Enumeration: The Case of Indo-European," p. 93.
Adrados, Francisco R., "Ideas on the Typology of Proto-Indo-European," p. 97.
Bader, Françoise, "Hittite Duratives and the Problem of IE Present-Formations with Infix and Suffix," p. 121.
Dieterle, Richard L., "The Thirty Brothers," p. 169.
Beekes, Robert S. P., "The Word for 'Four' in Proto-Indo-European," p. 215.
Wilson, Joseph P., "The Entitlement of Vespasian," p. 221.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Tradition and Development in Indo-European Studies," p. 225.
Sochacki, Zdzislaw, "Some Questions Concerning the Appearance of Rectangular Vessels in the European Neolithic and Aeneolithic," p. 227.
Râdulescu, Mircea-Mihai, "The Indo-European Position of Illyrian, Daco-Mysian and Thracian: A Historico-Methodological Approach," p. 239.
Naafs-Wilstra, Marianne C., "Indo-European 'Dichtersprache' in Sappho and Alcaeus," p. 273.
Winter, Werner, "Tocharian B ñakte, A ñkät 'god': Two Nouns, Their Derivatives, Their Etymology," p. 297.
Brosman, Paul W., Jr., "The Latin Fifth-Dimension Nouns with Nom. Sg. iees," p. 327.
Shields, Kenneth, Jr., "Some Remarks about the Dual of Indo-European O-Stems," p. 341.
Aristar, Anthony, "The Old Irish Relative and Word Order in Pre-Old Irish," p. 353.
Luraghi, Silvia, "Reconstructing Proto-Indo-European as an Ergative Language: A Test," p. 359.
Salmons, Joseph C., "Another Word on Lexical Data and Genetic Relationship (Reply to Manczak)," p. 381.
May, Brigitte Z., "The Language of the Old High German Zaubersprücher and Segen: The Intensive do," p. 385.
Hansen, Ove, "On the Recently Published Inscribed Gold Ring from the Argolid," p. 390.
Hamp, Eric P., "Indo-Hittite *men- 'see'," p. 391.
Hamp, Eric P., "IE *eui-kV [fem.]," p. 392.
Greppin, John A. C., "Armenian art 'field' and Arm. acem 'drive'," p. 393.