Beekes, Robert S. P., "Historical Phonology of Iranian," p. 1.
Kossian, Aram V., "On Anatolian-Urartian Linguistic Contacts," p. 27.
Lea, Anne E., "Lleu Wyllt: An Early British Prototype of the Legend of the Wild Man?" p. 35.
Niepokuj, Mary, "Requests for a Hearing in Norse and Other Indo-European Languages," p. 49.
Manaster Ramer, Alexis, "Nostratic from a Typological Point of View," p. 79.
Shields, Kenneth, Jr., "On the Pronominal Origin of the Indo-European Athematic Verbal Suffixes," p. 105.
Colarusso, John, "Proto-Pontic: Phyletic Links between Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Northwest Caucasian," p. 119.
Drews, Robert, "PIE Speakers and PA Speakers," p. 153.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Book Chronicle," p. 179.
Østmo, Einar, "Horses, Indo-Europeans and the Importance of Ships," p. 285.
Davis-Kimball, Jeannine, "Sauro-Sarmatian Nomadic Women: New Gender Identities," p. 327.
Braarvig, Jens, "Horses and Ships in Vedic and Old Greek Material," p. 345.
Jordán-Cólera, Carlos, "The Etymology of Insula, Aestus and Aestuarium," p. 353.
Danka, Ignacy Ryszard & Krysztof Tomasz Witczak, "Indo-European *k'wnHos and Its Meanings in the Neolithic and Post-Neolithic Times," p. 361.
Takács, Gábor, "Note on the Origin of PIE *pes- 'Penis'," p. 371.
Greppin, John A. C., "A Note on Georgian USX- and Indo-Europeanisms in the Kartvelian Languages," p. 383.
Pulju, Tim, "Indo-European *dA > *dh," p. 387.
Schmalstieg, William R., "The Origin of the Neuter Nominative-Accusative Singular in *-OM," p. 401.
Huld, Martin E., "The Loins of Antimachus," p. 409.
Brosman, Paul W., Jr., "Confirmation Concerning Two Aspects of Hittite Gender," p. 415.
Sen, Subhadra Kumar, "Unrequited Love: East and West," p. 417.
Polomé, Edgar C., "Book Chronicle," p. 419.
